docs/usage/tui.md, before:

# TUI Guide

The primary experience is the interactive explorer:

```bash
python explorer.py
```

`explorer.py` auto-detects setup, validates, and launches the TUI.
If no framework config exists yet, it defaults to `numpy` (no onboarding prompt).

## Controls

- `n` / `b`: move transform cursor next/back
- `x`: toggle transform include/exclude in active chain
- `[` / `]`: move selected transform up/down in chain precedence
- `f`: framework selector modal
- `p`: compute platform selector (`cpu` / `gpu`)
- `i`: guided parameter input
- `e`: quick `key=value` parameter edit
- `space`: pause/resume live dynamics motion
- `:`: command console (`run`, `set`, `show`, `help`)
- `h`: toggle compact/full detail layout
- `r`: reseed
- `q`: quit

## Explorer Flow

The explorer runs as one continuous view.
Transform chains, parameter edits, and live dynamics are toggles within the same screen.

## Start with a Specific Transform Set

```bash
python explorer.py render --transforms gradient_descent,momentum,adam --transform momentum
```

Top 5 core transforms:
- `tensor_ops`
- `chain_rule`
- `gradient_descent`
- `momentum`
- `adam`

- `--transforms`: comma-separated transform keys, or `default`/`all`
- `--transform`: key/title to focus initially

For non-interactive command usage, see `docs/usage/cli.md`.

Commit message:

feat: automate asset/readme sync and add rust-core acceleration scaffold

docs/usage/tui.md, after:

# TUI Guide

The TUI is the primary operator interface.

Launch:

```bash
python explorer.py
```

If no prior config exists, the default framework is:

- `mlx` on macOS
- `numpy` on other platforms

## Operator Controls

- `n` / `b`: move transform cursor next/back
- `x`: include or exclude focused transform from the active chain
- `[` / `]`: shift selected transform precedence up/down
- `f`: open framework selector
- `p`: open compute platform selector (`cpu` / `gpu`)
- `i`: guided parameter input
- `e`: quick `key=value` parameter edit
- `space`: pause/resume live dynamics
- `:`: command console (`run`, `set`, `show`, `help`)
- `h`: toggle compact/full detail layout
- `r`: reseed
- `q`: quit

## Operational Pattern

The explorer is a continuous view:

1. select transforms
2. order precedence
3. tune parameters
4. execute and inspect output

## Start With a Preselected Chain

```bash
python explorer.py render --transforms gradient_descent,momentum,adam --transform momentum
```

- `--transforms`: comma-separated keys, `default`, or `all`
- `--transform`: initial focused key or title fragment
